* What are the major goals of the project?

To design a programming language and adapt software engineering
techniques to implement and maintain highly reliable electronic
prescriptions. To test this programming language by building a program
to management of the high blood sugar levels that sometimes occur in
pregnant women (Gestational Diabetes Mellitus (GDM)).

Major Activities:

Originally this project was a two year project, with the plan of
spending our energy right away on building the programming language
and the GDM proscription and this intention is reflected in the
proposal document. During the time between when we submitted the
proposal and when we received the good news that it would be funded we
had optimistically attempted to lay groundwork to prepare for such
good news, but had quickly learned that we needed more time to bridge
the ``cultural chasm'' (discussed briefly in the proposal itself).

In consultation with John Reppy, we revised the proposal from a 2 year
one to a 3 year one with the plan for the first year to be spent
getting the computer science researchers acquainted with the medical
system (and to a lesser extent, vice versa). This year turned out to
be especially important because the computer science researchers
needed to take a Hep-B vaccine before being able to enter the GDM
clinic, and that vaccine takes 7 months to take effect.

While getting vaccinated, we spent the the bulk of our time on two
activitities: studying the medical literature to gain basic background
information and to try to find and understand other algorithmic
approaches to medicine and writing an essay that explains our approach
and why it is different. (This essay is nearing completion but is not
quite ready yet.)

Since getting vaccinated, we have also been spending several hours a
week observing in the GDM clinic and are now fairly familiar with
routine procedures of the clinic and are beginning to inject algorithm
thinking into their routine. We have not yet made any changes to the
medical practice in the clinic, however; we are so far focusing on
writing down their existing practices as algorithms to try to uncover
the underlying programming language.


These clinic visits consist of direct observation of clinical
encounters between pregnant women with GDM and clinicians (physicians
and advanced practice nurse). We also discuss with clinical staff our
observations and the challenges of helping these patients with their
GDM. 

Overall, these observations and discussions have been enlightening and
helpful. We remain optimistic about the original goals of the proposal
and excited to dig more deeply into it, in the coming year.

Specific Objectives:



Significant results:


Key outcomes or Other achievements:



* What opportunities for training and professional development has the project provided?

Burke Fetscher and Robby Findler have learned a considerable amount
about the day-to-day function of the GDM clinic and hospitals in
general. Steve Belknap and Charlotte Niznik have learned about
computation and algorithmic expression.

The team is developing a common understanding about how to approach
the problem and develop a means of expressing clinical activities and
goals in algorithmic form.

* How have the results been disseminated to communities of interest?

We plan to submit that essay to Nature in the coming weeks or months.

* What do you plan to do during the next reporting period to accomplish the goals?

We plan to follow the steps outlined in the propsal.
